[intense music]
(applause)
MATT: Good morning, everyone. Whoa! There we go, I
think we're good?
MARY: Good morning!
MATT: Morning!
MARY: How do you want to do this?
MATT: I saw you were repping with this shirt. It
made me happy. Yeah, both of our schedules on our
badges said this was the main stage. So if
you have any friends that are there, let them know
that they're in the wrong place. And that it's
okay because we were also at the wrong place. We
almost fought for it, too. There were Guild Wars
folks there and we were like: Whose panel is this?
Are you sure?
MARY: Smackdown backstage.
MATT: It almost happened. So welcome to our
Saturday morning-ish, near noonish Critical Role panel!
(applause)
MATT: Glad you guys could join us. Who here hasn't
seen the show?
MARY: Awesome! Oh, great!
MATT: Fantastic! So careful with spoilers.
(alarm beeping)
MATT: (explosion) Sorry, I just assume that's what
follows that sound. We're a show of a bunch of
voice actors that sit around, roll dice, and play
Dungeons & Dragons like the long-term basement
nerds we are; it's awesome. That's pretty much the
show! Once a week on Twitch we'll get together and
continue to game and people show up and watch us
and it's really amazing. I don't really know how
it happened, but you guys are incredible and the
community that's come out of this is continuously
blowing me away. So a round of applause for you
guys.
(applause)
MARY: I don't know who did it!
MATT: We've got mood lighting now, heck yeah. And
the ominous countdown in the corner.
MARY: I know! We have to solve this puzzle.
MATT: So if we have that going like the '24' sound
through the whole panel it'd be great!
MARY: That'd be terrifying.
MATT: We should start with intros. Mary.
MARY: Hi, I'm Mary Elizabeth McGlynn, and I had
never played Dungeons & Dragons until Matt asked
me onto Critical Role and I played a tiefling
warlock named Zahra. I have two kill shots, one on
Rimefang, poor sucker. And a beholder, much to
Vex's-- I vexed Vex with two kill shots. Laura
Bailey is very mad at me. It's her birthday today,
so get on board and-- actually, it's Liam and
Laura's birthday today, so tweet them. The twins'
birthday.
MATT: That's actually how they came up with the
idea to make their characters twins is because
they share a birthday and I said, well, that's
convenient.
MARY: So I'd never played Dungeons & Dragons. I
had no idea. I've taken a lot of theater and I
didn't realize-- I think I was intimidated by it
because the kids I knew growing up were really--
They kept to themselves and were this really
quiet, shy group and I was a bit louder and with a
louder group of nerds and they were a quieter
group of nerds. So we never really crossed borders
and they'd play D&D all the time. I don't know
what that is and it's freaking me out a little bit
until I realized it's just improv with dice
rolling to see how well your improv goes. And I
thought: That's brilliant! These were the probably
the most creative people I could've known and I
didn't get a chance to know them, and now I do. I
just love the idea that it is one of the most
creative things you can do, and what's come out of
it: the fan art, the fan shipping, all the stuff
that's happening. And Kash and Zee are not an
item, let's put it out there now.
MATT: We have built Tumblr trash! Yes!
MARY: Yes! First of all, to watch this guy in
action is just amazing! Unbelievable! Amazing!
I've been directing Matt for years and I had no
idea. I was like: I'm so intimidated to direct you
now. (laughs)
MATT: It is a weird reversal. For most of my life
it's been: Oh, don't let them know you play
Dungeons & Dragons.
MARY: How long have you been playing?
MATT: I've been playing since my freshman of high
school, so 20 years this year.
MARY: Wow!
MATT: I've been playing longer than some of you
have been alive! Oh God!
MARY: What was the first character you rolled?
MATT: That hit me harder than I expected.
MARY: It's true, though. Terrifying.
MATT: First character I ever made, I was invited
to the game and I didn't know much about the
logistics of it, but I wanted to be a wizard,
because magic practitioners sound like a really
cool idea, and so I made a wizard. This was Second
Edition D&D so I had to learn how THAC0 worked.
And I was like, "Okay, what kind of wizard can I
make? Oh, there are kits!" And your kits are ways
you customize your character, and so I was like,
"Oh, a militant wizard? I get to wield a sword and
"be a wizard like Gandalf? Cool!" Little did I know
it was the most useless kit ever because wizards
back then were so dead if you didn't have magic
ready. So if you get up with a sword and go "Eh!"
you're dead. So it wasn't the best idea, but it
was fine and we played for a bit, but my DM at the
time was not the best DM, and after we played for
a few months, I got really frustrated with the
style, and we had one crux moment during a game
that got me so frustrated I just left and decided,
"I'm going to DM my own stuff now. I know there's
more to this. It can be better." And I really
haven't played characters much since.
MARY: You've been DMing that long?
MATT: Yeah. I've played in games. I've played a
lot of other systems as well, but D&D's kinda
where my heart is because I'm a big RPG fantasy
nerd.
MARY: How are you liking Fifth Edition?
MATT: I love it! I love it. I think I've really
enjoyed Second Edition because it was all I knew,
although it had its quirks. Somehow everyone had
18-100 strength. Everyone was really lucky when
they rolled their character. But the math was
ridiculous. But it had such depth to it, and 3.0
and 3.5 I felt were really, really good ways to allow
character customization. It did tend to complicate
aspects of combat, or at least cause a lot of
floating modifiers, and the math kind of--while
less esoteric math-- based around the AC and THAC0
equation. It didn't lend to a lot of everyone
paying attention to, "Okay, you get the +1 from
here and this gives you +1 to hit and damage from
"the bard thing. Oh, but you have this Bless spell
on, so it's another +1 to hit from there, so +4...
"but you're also turned away, so it's +3 and ugh!"
I just start bleeding from the nose.
MARY: Head explodes.
MATT: But you know, you made it work, and it was
better than previous editions, and Fourth Edition
came out and that was a struggle to certain
points. I ran a long-term Fourth Edition game
which my friend Shawn actually played in here.
Yeah, we actually had a great job. Actually, Shawn
here, if you guys are watching the game we did the
other night, we had the Q&A? He was the rogue in
my Ravenloft campaign for two years that ended up
taking over the castle after Strahd and cut out
the bard's tongue and turned him into his own
private Theon at end of the game. A real happy
ending there. Ravenloft.
MARY: Sang with a lot of vowels after that.
MATT: Fourth Edition, it had some cool ideas, I
love the skill challenge aspect of it. I felt the
idea of the at-will magics-- Magic practitioners
never actually ran out of spells, there was some
low-level stuff that they could just do forever.
It was really great and useful, because as a
wizard I never wanna have to go, "Well, I'm out of
spells." You shouldn't have that, you shouldn't
have to be able to only Mage Hand three times a
day. I'm like, "No, I don't want to pick up stuff.
"I trained for years in this shit. Make my book
float to me!" So the Fourth Edition at-will magics
carried over as the cantrips in Fifth, and so they
kept that over, which was really nice. The skill
system was a little more refined and the Fifth
Edition combat and character development still
allows a breadth of customization with your
character, but not overcomplicated, and I really
felt like they streamlined it in the right ways,
so I'm really enjoying Fifth Edition. I think it's
[audio skips].
MARY: Yeah, cantrips are awesome, because I
realized as a warlock, I get three spells and
that's it. I mean like three? That's it.
MATT: To be fair, those three spells--
MARY: They're pretty good.
MATT: They pack a punch there.
MARY: Come on, how many hit points did Rimefang
have left when I did the Hellish Rebuke? It was
like six, right? So Laura could have went (blows)
on him and he would have been dead. It was just I
got lucky with the timing of my turn, that's it.
Both times. Happy Birthday, Laura. (laughs)
MATT: That's one of the things I love about this
game in general and any RPG system, is everybody
who grew up as a kid playing in their front yard
kind of fighting windmills like Don Quixote, we
all had that period of time where we embraced our
imagination and made up stories and went with it.
And as we grow up, society tends to have this
trend of pushing that thought away. "No, you must
"be a realist. You must not play. You must not be
able to get together with people and just be
"creative for the hell of being creative." And RPGs
are one of the mediums that continues to allow
that to flourish long into adulthood, and I think
it's such a wonderful therapeutic and positive way
of reinforcing social connection with people. I've
built stronger bonds with the people I've gamed with
than most anybody else in my life, and there's
something about that shared adventure experience
that's so wonderful and those memories are real.
MARY: But you're world-building, too, in your
memory, building off of these characters. I look
up-- I mean, these are some of my best friends in
the world are playing on Critical Role, and after
a while I forget that it's Laura and Travis and
Sam and Liam. I'm just worried about how the hell
is Scanlan going get out of this stupid dragon?
And Grog is on the chain flying behind him and Vex
can't fly fast enough on the broom and if he lets
go-- I mean, these are massive concerns about
these characters that I've really come to love. I
let go of the fact that I'm stalking my friends
online, because it was a real conflict for a
while. Is it weird that I'm watching my friends
every week play this game? And I realize it
wasn't. I know it's weird. Why be normal, right?
But it was amazing and I'm just so in love with
these characters. I'm so glad that Pike is back.
It's just--
(cheers and applause)
MATT: We've never been so torn about promoting a
friend's television series. "Go watch Blindspot,
"hopefully it'll get a second season."
ASHLEY: You're like some kind of wizard!
AUDREY: What do we do now, elf?
ASHLEY: Actually, I am a gnome cleric. Now--
MARY: So we keep praying to move Blindspot to LA
so she doesn't have to go back to New York.
MATT: So if we can write a petition to Blindspot
to set the show in LA next season, that'd be
great. We'd appreciate that. Part of this-- since
you know the gist of it so far, let's open the
floor to questions. We'll turn this into a Q&A. We
have a microphone--
MARY: There's a mic there, so if you guys want to
ask anything--
MATT: Go ahead and line up behind that microphone
and we'll start taking your questions one at time.
We'll get through as many of you guys as we
possibly can. As you can see, we have a looming
48, 47 minutes left.
MARY: 47:47, make a wish!
MATT: All right, sir, what's your name?
CONNER: My name's Conner, hello hello? Screw it,
I'm loud!
MARY: Be loud, Conner! Be loud!
CONNER: My name's Conner, sometimes people call me
Tiffany, don't ask why.
MATT: Hi, Conner-Tiffany!
CONNER: So my question, a bit more of a serious
one: there's so much stigma around games like D&D
and roleplaying and stuff like that, that
society sometimes tends to exploit that nerd
culture with shows like Big Bang Theory and
whatnot--
MATT: (shudders)
CONNER: I told you it was a serious question.
MATT: No, it is, and you definitely tugged a cord
there. You invoked that which should not be
invoked. Continue, no, it's a necessary
conversation.
CONNER: Now things like Critical Role, which
features, if I may say, a charismatic cast of
people that are authentically playing the game.
How do you think this is going to trend in the
next ten years where these types of things start
to become more popular culture? Where they start
having followings, niche audiences, like with Twitch,
it's a great way to get out to 20 or 30
thousand views per episode, livestreaming. Do you
think it's going to keep addressed in this area, do
you think you it's going to become an actual
television series or something like that one day?
What are your thoughts on that?
MATT: I don't know. We're still kind of holding
on as to what this show is. We had no idea this
was going to become whatever it is. We had like a
six to eight week plan of, "Well, if it doesn't
"work out, we'll just go home and keep playing on
our own." And people found us and resonated and
started creating their own games and it just built
this community that I never expected. It's become
so much more important to me than just a game we
play now. It's introducing other people to it and
watching them create their own stories with their
friends and send us pictures of their game nights
and their families playing now. To me it's--
D&D has an unfortunate stigma because of when the
time it came out there was a very anti-D&D
fundamentalist Christian movement that didn't
understand the game, just saw surface elements and
decided that it was "evil demons being summoned!"
CONNER: Those are my people, I apologize.
MATT: Oh no, it's okay! It's my people too!
(Southern accent) My family's all from the South as
well, I fully understand. Don't think y'all gotta
carry that burden just yourself. So that put a
stigma on it, and the media of course ran with it,
as it does. So yeah, it got off to a bad start.
But I think now, through geek culture becoming pop
culture, for better or for worse, I think largely
for the better, you're now seeing a trend of
people that grew up playing D&D, who grew up
writing stories and making up stories with their
friends, are inheriting the entertainment
industry. They're becoming the producers and the
writers and the directors of films, television. So
that's part of the reason we've had this big
surgence in geek culture is because now the people
that are creating the media are the geeks. We took
over.
MARY: Yeah. Yeah, we did. It wasn't "the meek
shall inherit the earth," it was "the geeks shall
"inherit the earth." I mean, it really is.
MATT: And so, to your question there, I'm not sure
where it's going to go. I think it's cool that
it's bringing it to an audience that didn't have
the opportunity to really understand at first.
There are a lot of people out there that would
love to play RPGs, but like Mary said, you just
didn't really know what it was, and there was a
weird-- between the stigma, or just intimidation,
you didn't think it was something you could or
would want to do. And so, through these shows, a
lot of people message us almost daily saying,
since I watched your show I went out and bought
the books and started a game with my family, or
with my father, and we reconnected through it.
It's become this really cool re-emergence of
tabletop gaming. And thanks to other shows, like
High Rollers and the Real Role Play Guys, and now
the Dice, Camera, Action that Wizards does,
there's this trend now of people showing other
people what D&D can be. And other RPGs as well.
Like Zac, who used to run our stream, is now doing
his Hyper RPG Go up in Seattle, and they're doing
a bunch of awesome Shadowrun games and all these
different other types of RPGs as well. So will it
end up mainstream media? I don't know. I know
there's people trying it, because whenever
anything seems to be doing well on the internet,
that means all the executives in a room somewhere
with a bunch of suits have to be like, "How can we
capture this and make money?" So I'm sure we'll
see some attempts at that. Some may be genuine,
some may not be. I think the charm of our show is
the fact that we're just a bunch of doofuses that
like each other a lot, and play for our own
amusement, not necessarily to make maximum dollar
for our company. As soon as that gets introduced,
it kind of gets a little weird and, I don't know,
the flavor gets a little tainted for me. So I
think as long as people are genuine in producing
this content, it will still resonate with people.
So we'll see how the entertainment industry treats
it. I know we're putting our feet on the ground
making sure that it doesn't fall in that category,
because I would rather jump in front of traffic. (laughs)
MARY: Yeah. I also feel like it's sort of starting
to change the whole idea of "adulting." You know,
of what it is to be an adult, and you have to be
straight and serious and everything else. And it's
just like that combined with the internet, and
everything in this sort of isolationism that that
causes, that this is now bringing people together
again in a social environment, to be creative. And
with the cutting of funding in schools and
everything else, I feel like we're sort of losing
that creativity, and that idea that we are here
to-- That's one of our main things as human
beings, is the power to create, you know? I just
think it's an amazing thing, and I think it's
bringing people together. And bringing this out of
the basement and into the light, and making it
cool. And that it's all right to now talk to
people again and not just sit on your phone and
tweet anonymously to people, you know?
MATT: To be fair, it's okay to go back in the
basement, for those of us who don't like light.
MARY: Yeah, that's fine.
MATT: Not a fan of sunlight myself. Basement's
cool.
MARY: Yeah. Nothing wrong with that. But still. Go
out and see the stars. There's no light. Go look
at the stars.
CONNER: That's it. Well, thanks for coming to
MomoCon.
MATT and MARY: Thanks for having us.
MARY: Thanks, Tiffany. We love you.
STEPHANIE: I think it's working. Do I need to
be--? Hi!
MATT: Hi! What's your name?
STEPHANIE: Stephanie.
MATT: Hi, Stephanie.
STEPHANIE: I just wanted to say thank you for
bringing Critical Role into my life, because it's
amazing. And, I'm pretty sure, into everybody
else's life that's here. So I just wanted to thank
you personally, and also congratulate you guys
personally for 50 plus episodes of Critical Role.
(cheering)
STEPHANIE: And so my question is-- I'm sorry; I'm
shaking.
MATT: It's okay.
STEPHANIE: My question to you guys: Which is your
favorite character in the Critical Role world?
MATT: Okay. Favorite character in the Critical
Role world.
MARY: What's his name, who Percy goes to to get
ammunition?
MATT: Victor.
MARY: Victor! Victor. The fact that-- Who watched
the birth of Victor? The first time-- I mean, come
on! How, where? It just came out.
MATT: That's what scares me. I don't know where it
came from. That was a purely improvised character.
That has become like a staple now.
MARY: I know, and I'm so afraid every time you go
back to him there's going to be less and less of him.
(laughter)
MATT: There's a good chance. When you're the only
individual that has discovered black powder in the
universe, and that's kind of your personality,
you're not going to be very careful with it. We've
already seen him blow up once, though it was not
in canon. Victor's an interesting one. I'm sure
he'll show up again.
MARY: They're all so unique though, everybody's
got such wonderful personalities. I love the way
that Vax and Vex play off of-- I'm a twin, so to
see them play off each other. Yeah, they're
totally twins. It's kind of amazing, and Sam
Riegel is just a bloody genius.
(laughter)
MARY: I don't know where that stuff comes from.
MATT: Same place Victor came from, I think.
MARY: Yeah, I think so. And Travis. Who doesn't
love Grog? I was sort of scared with Craven Edge,
I thought for a while Bacon might take our Grog,
and I don't want that to happen.
MATT: Yeah. (chuckles)
(laughter)
MARY: And there's still the skull. Still that
skull though, isn't that skull still there?
MATT: Yeah, what happened to that skull?
MARY: I don't know. Where did that skull go?
MATT: I know where it went.
(laughter)
MARY: How far in advance do you plan where they're
going to go? In this world, I mean.
MATT: I don't plan where they're going to go,
because I don't know where they're going to go. I
plan possible places they can go. I try and
prepare enough to the point where I'm not
completely lost if they make random choices, but
it still happens occasionally. For me it's about
considering what their discussions have been in
the game, listening to what their characters have
insinuated they might want to do next, and then
I'll flesh out those avenues they might possibly
go, so that when they choose that path or this path, I
have some things prepared for it.
MARY: Did you have the acid river prepared when
you knew at some point they were going to get on
that rug?
(laughter)
MARY: I'm sorry, I know it's a very painful
wound.
MATT: No, the acid river had nothing to do with
the rug. The acid river had everything to do with Wil
Wheaton being a guest in that episode.
(laughter)
MARY: Okay, why?
MATT: Okay, so you aren't aware of this: Wil
Wheaton used to play on Acquisitions Inc., which is
the PAX prime live game they did with the official
D&D folks, and he had a character named Aeofel who
died horribly in a pit of acid.
MARY: Oh. Did he always roll ones?
MATT: Of course. It's Wil Wheaton!
(laughter)
MATT: And it became a thing. He was really
distraught that his character died straight-up and
was gone for good in this acid pit, and the
internet of course let him know: "Hey man, your
"guy died in acid." He's like: "I know." You get
this whole long post about the eulogy of Aeofel
and it became a thing. And so acid pits and him is
a very sore spot. So of course when I had the
opportunity to have Wil Wheaton play in my D&D
game, I couldn't not do that.
(laughter)
MATT: It also just unfortunately happened that the rug
got in. I was like: "Oh!" Magical enchantments can
resist certain things, but that's not one of them
for a tapestry.
(laughter)
MATT: Yeah. It's hard for me to pick a favorite
character. I really enjoy playing, as an NPC,
Gilmore is a lot of fun.
MARY: Gilmore. I was just going to say.
(cheering)
MATT: The NPCs I have that are the most layered
are Gilmore and Allura, and I enjoy playing them
both for different reasons, because they're both
very, very layered characters. You guys have
probably only seen elements of those two, and I
hope more of that plays out in the future, but
both those characters are two that I really enjoy
jumping into their shoes for a bit. They're both
very close and personal to me.
STEPHANIE: Thank you guys!
MATT: Thank you! Good question.
ERIN: Hello.
MATT: Hello, what's your name?
ERIN: My name is Erin, I'm songtree on Twitch and
also Twitter. My question is: Do you guys ever
watch past episodes, and if so, which one have
you watched the most, or have you most enjoyed?
MARY: I have watched them all. I watch it every
week with you guys. We flew in on Thursday night,
landed about 10:30 or 11:00, and I'm in the car
going: "I can find it, I can find it on Twitch,
"it's-- There it is!" And the Q&A was going on and
stayed up until two and watched Percy, and then I
was like, "I can't watch, I have to go to bed." So
I'm live-tweeting with you guys pretty much every
week if I'm available. I loved the Wil and Kash
episodes, I thought those were really fun.
MATT: Yeah.
MARY: I wish we had been there to see Pike die and
be brought back.
MATT: Yeah, that was intense.
(silence)
(laughter)
MARY: I remember hearing about it, Laura was like:
"Aww." That's the week I was like, "What's wrong?"
She's like, "Intense D&D..." Because you guys used
to play how many hours a day? You would do these
marathon sessions.
MATT: Yeah, because we could only play once every
four to six weeks, and so we'd play for a standard
eight hours, or more sometimes, depending.
ERIN: Yeah, full Saturday.
MATT: We wanted to get as much time as we could
when we got the dads away from their kids, we had
a very short window where we're like: "All right,
maximize time!" Then we all go home drained. Worth
it. So as far as your question is concerned, I've
rewatched a lot of them, partially because I have
to go back and-- It works as a good note-taker as
a DM to have the actual episode online. I'd be
like: "What-- Who did they meet again? What NPC
did they talk to, oh crap, I'll look it up. Okay,
"there we go, what did that character sound like?"
It's been a helpful tool for me to have that
video. There have been times where we'd put
episodes on in the background when we had to leave
our bird alone for a while, just so she'd hear our
voices.
(awwing)
MARY: Which is your bird's favorite episode?
MATT: I don't know. She's a bird? We found
ourselves putting this couple of episodes on and
then sitting down and ended up watching a full
episode, and me and Marisha would be like: "Oh,
"we're those people."
(laughter)
MATT: We're like: "We watched a full episode of
our own show that we already did. Ugh." It was a
good episode, though.
(laughter)
MATT: The one I probably watched the most, just
because I love the reactions to it, would have
been the Conclave attack.
MARY: That was so good.
MATT: Yeah it was.
MARY: Man.
MATT: Holding on to that for two years.
MARY: Wow. And stuff is going to go down. I can't
wait to see it.
ERIN: For me it's probably cows.
MARY: Cows. That was amazing.
MATT: Let me tell you. Seeming messes up
everything in the best way. Thank you so much.
All right, we have a few people back there, we'll
try and make these answers more concise, my fault,
sorry. Hello.
ANDREW: Hi. My name is Andrew.
MARY: You can tilt that up if you want. No, just
the mic itself. There you go.
ANDREW: Appreciate it. I'm tall.
MATT and MARY: Hi Paul!
ANDREW: No, I'm Andrew.
(laughter)
ANDREW: No, I had to adjust the mic.
MARY: Oh, you're tall? Hi Tall!
MATT: I see.
(laughter)
MARY: Sorry.
ANDREW: My question is mostly directed at Matt.
Because I'm kind of an aspiring voice actor, but
I'm kind of coming up here asking as a
going-to-be-a-DM and game designer.
MATT: Oh, very cool.
ANDREW: And so I was hoping-- One thing I'm trying
to figure out is, I've got a game in the works
here, but the thing I'm trying to figure out is,
how do I help it to where I can help players
begin, to where they can just set up a character
in maybe ten, 15 minutes and go. Have there been
systems that have been fairly welcoming?
MATT: There are many systems that are a lot faster
at character building than D&D. D&D is a fairly
deep system. It's not super deep, it's not Rifts
deep. There are other systems that are a lot
faster, some Savage World stuff can be pretty fast
to put together. If you look online for fast
character generation RPGs, especially on RPGnet,
they'll have a lot of examples that I can't think
of any off of the top of my head right now.
AUDIENCE: Dungeon World.
MATT: Dungeon World! There you go, that's one.
Those are all great systems. If it's D&D in
particular, you can also pre-create characters,
like generate a character per class if it's their
first game and they don't know what to do. Then
instead of having them build it, you can have them
pick from the list and tweak and customize a few
things if they want to, and then introduce them to
the game. That way you have taken the weight off
their shoulders. I've done that for a few people,
where I'll create their character for them in
advance and they'll show up and be like: "Okay,
"I'll pick this guy." And I'm like: "Cool, go!" And
the other characters just go away. Or I make them
NPCs. Why not? That's my recommendation.
ANDREW: Cool. Appreciate it.
MATT: No worries. Good question.
ANDREW: Thank you.
MARY: Good luck with the voice acting.
MATT: And good luck with he DMing, dude!
HARLEY: Okay, I'm much shorter. Hi!
MATT and MARY: Hi!
HARLEY: My name is Harley, like the motorcycle,
because people end up calling me Hayleigh.
MATT: Hey Harley. Harley Quinn is more what I
would think.
MARY: Yeah, it's what I would go to.
HARLEY: More people that I know apparently know
the motorcycle than that Quinn. So my question is:
How do y'all come up with the voices for y'all's
characters? Because that's always interesting,
because each of them have different accents, and
ways of speaking.
MARY: Zahra was easy for me, the minute I said
"Zahra" I was like, well, that's her voice right
there. Anybody who's got a name called Zahra, and
she was very sort of in there. I had been doing a
female crusader for Diablo 3 and for Heroes of the
Storm, and I loved Johanna, and she was a bit more
street, but I loved that vocal placement. I didn't
even know what Zahra was going to be until we
started the show, and then that's what the voice
was. It just came out of that and my obsession of
the moon and the stars and everything else, so I
thought I'd start with myself. Because I didn't
know anything else, especially about this world,
so when I was building her I just said, well, I'll
have her be obsessed with the moon and everything
else, because that's an obsession I'm very
familiar with, so I started with me and my own
likes and I think I'm trying to figure out what I want
to roll next. I would love to hear you talk about
the bard, the conductor--
MATT: The Maestro?
MARY: The Maestro, yeah, sounds really cool. So,
short answer is Zahra, and thus came her voice.
MATT: I spent a lot of time alone as a kid. I
don't know? For me, especially from a DM
standpoint, it's considering sometimes character
regionality or some races might have kitschy
themes through them. Like the dwarves, I tend to
go Scottish. Not all of them, but just because
it's classic, and I will always make any excuse for
myself to do a Scottish brogue because it's my
favorite dialect ever. I love it so much. It's
like music. Horrible, discordant music.
MARY: What was the game that you were talking
about yesterday with Taliesin? Taliesin directed
you in a game.
MATT: Akiba's Trip?
MARY: Yeah.
MATT: Yeah, they had me do the "foreigner voice,"
which is a voice setting you can set for NPCs in
the game, and in the Japanese version the
foreigner voice is American and they couldn't do
that. Taliesin was like, "Whatever accent you want
to do that's not American," so I'm like (Scottish
voice) "All right. This is your foreigner." Which
is great, because you could set the voices to
little moe café maids. Little cute anime girl, and
you enter and it's like (Scottish voice) "Hello!
"Would you like a tea?"
(laughter)
MARY: I love that story so much.
MATT: As such, I think everyone should play that
game. For that reason alone. For me, it's just
what works for the character, what sounds
different and unique so they stand out against
each other. I've made a lot of characters in this
world and I don't have that many voices, so it's
hard to differentiate a lot of the time, so I try
and find ways, whether it be through texture,
timbre, vocal patterns--
MARY: Attitude is huge.
MATT: Accents-- attitude, physicality.
MARY: I mean, Gilmore, the minute you do that--
that's Gilmore, right? He doesn't need to say a
word. It's just... all of a sudden he's there.
It's amazing. It's physicality as well. I think
that also-- for me, as a watcher, it really
enhances the characters.
MATT: Being a dragon can be a dragon.
(cheering)
MATT: But being a dragon can be a dragon.
MARY: Not anymore, Rimefang.
MATT: Aww...
(laughter)
HARLEY: Thank you.
MATT: Good question! Thank you. Hello! There we
go.
NICK: Hi.
MATT: Hi, what's your name?
NICK: I'm Nick.
MATT and MARY: Hi, Nick!
NICK: Quick question. You guys go to a ton of
different places in-- Westruun was the main
continent, right?
MATT: Tal'Dorei's the main continent that they're
in right now, yeah.
NICK: Tal'Dorei, got it. Where's Westruun? Sorry.
MATT: Westruun is a town in central Tal'Dorei.
NICK: Got it. So in Tal'Dorei, you guys go to tons
of different places. My question is: do you have
any deserts in there? Everywhere gets colder and
colder. It's cold one way, and then you go north
and it's colder now. Are there any deserts or hot
places?
MATT: On Tal'Dorei-- Tal'Dorei is a northern
continent. It starts to crest... Othanzia is much
colder, which is the other continent that has
Vasselheim. That's where the Slayer's Take is,
that's where the Fire Ashari exist. That one's
even further north and that one's most of the time
covered in snow or at least some level of cold,
cloudy weather. The northern parts of Tal'Dorei
like Whitestone and where Kraghammer is-- those
are a little more snow-covered. But yeah, it's a
colder continent by nature. It's more of the
European-type climate. Marquet is a southern
continent. That's where Ank'Harel is, and that is
a mostly desert continent. It is probably 70%
desert-covered. If ever they go there, that will
be a very different scenic and cultural experience
than what they've encountered at all in the
campaign thus far. Should be interesting.
NICK: Thank you.
MATT: No worries.
NICK: Could we hear McCree or the black powder
merchant? (laughter) Either one!
MATT: I'll do you one better. (McCree voice) "It's
high noon."
(cheering)
MATT: (Victor voice) "What time? What time is it?
I don't know-- noon? No! It's three o'clock!"
There you go.
NICK: Thank you.
(cheering)
MARY: So good. So good!
RYAN: Hello. My name is Rock McKickass.
MARY: Hey, Kick Ass!
RYAN: My friends call me Ryan. First thing I
wanted to do was thank you on behalf of a friend
of mine. He's running a Pathfinder campaign, and
when you did those Tips and Tricks videos on Geek
and Sundry, I showed them to him and they helped
him immensely at running the campaign a lot
smoother.
MATT: Awesome! That's great. Also, a plug for a
friend, finding time to do more Tips and Tricks has
been difficult. I am trying to get into a new
batch soon. But at the same time a good friend of
mine, Matt Colville, who is the writer of Turtle
Rock, has gone further than I ever could as far as
outlining really detailed videos on worldbuilding
and running a game, and running encounters. So if
you're like, "Oh, I'm mad there's not more GM Tips."
There's a guy who is doing a much better job than
me, who is doing a lot more than me, go watch his
shit. His stuff. Sorry. Family panel. But, yeah,
Matt Colville, go check out his videos. They are
really good. Anyway, back to your question?
RYAN: My question is: What was the most difficult
thing you have had to do as a DM and how did you
end up dealing with it if you did?
MATT: Killing a player is always a difficult
thing. I have done it in a few games and it's not
a fun experience, but it is an interesting
experience from a narrative standpoint. D&D is a
fantasy world and there are things that can
reverse death. In D&D, sometimes it can be, later
in the game, a little too easy to reverse death in
my opinion. That's why I introduced the skill
challenge ritual for resurrection in my game. Take
an element of the skill challenge from Fourth
Edition that I liked, and convert that to the idea
that not every soul can be recovered. Whether they
themselves accept their own death, or whatever
entity holds sway over their immortal soul
takes them before the ritual can... That's kind of
the challenge in that ritual. The players, their
actions in that ritual essentially represent them
trying to facilitate or reach out to their soul to
stay and to come back to the body. But every
single time I've had to kill a player, it's hard.
Because this person has put so much energy and
time into this. And you are essentially, not
robbing them of it, but circumstantially, they're
losing it and you have to be the person to agree
to it and tell them, "They're gone." And it sucks.
And it's hard. And people go home sometimes
crying. And you're like, "What have I done?!"
(laughter)
MATT: But, conversely, that mourning process and
that acceptance, one, it's a fresh start for them
to create something that they have always wanted
to play before. And the story implications of
losing a hero really, really continues to guide
how tight the rest of the survivors are. I had a
game, once again Shawn was in, where we had most
of the party killed in a battle with a bunch of
ghouls. In this one campaign, necromancy had been
abolished for so long that it was just a myth. No
one believed that undead really existed or if they
did, it's more of a wives' tale and it's grossly
exaggerated. Their first time into the Shadowfell
they go into this tomb and they walk into a room
with a bunch of ghouls. And I think it was some
sort of an undead knight. And they're like, "Oh,
"what the hell are these things? They're just
nasty-looking people? All right. We'll go and each
"take one." Well, three people paralyzed later.
They just converged, and Shawn, being the smart
person, his ranger grabbed Chloe, the rogue, who
was screaming out trying to help them and
says, "No, we have to go. There's no way we can
win this," and dragged her out of the tomb as they
watched their three other party members be eaten
alive by the ghouls.
(groaning)
MATT: And it was like, "What are you gonna do?
Welcome to the Shadowfell."
(laughter)
MATT: That's definitely the hardest thing for me
to do is to notify a player that their character
is dead. Good question.
JEREMY: Afternoon. My name is Jeremy.
MATT: Hi, Jeremy.
JEREMY: I guess this is a question for both of
you. One as a fan and one as a person running the
game. Where do you hope the current Critical Role
campaign ends, and based on the suicidal
tendencies of your players and friends, where do
you think it's actually going to end?
MARY: There's a fine between suicidal and brave.
JEREMY: True.
MARY: I like to lean towards that they're brave.
MATT: With a toe in suicidal. I-- Unless they
make real some serious mistakes. Here's the thing.
For a TPK to happen they have to not be able to
acknowledge their mortality. Most TPKs happen in
games because the players are assuming they're
going to win. Or they're just not being careful.
"If we keep fighting and keep fighting-- Oh god
he's down too. I know if I keep fighting-- I'm the
"only left. If I keep fighting-- We're dead?!" You
know? Then yeah, it's going to happen.
Like Shawn-- that could have been a total TPK if
his character wasn't like, "Okay, we're not going
"to win this. Any chance we have of recovering this
party, some of us have to get out of here alive.
"Run." As long as somebody does that, there are
opportunities to try and retrieve a few of those
people, you know, because of resurrection magic,
and such. And there's always the Wish spell, you
can always quest down the road, part of an
adventure for a while could be to find a way to
find a being of enough power to be able to Wish a
friend back to life. That's a classic fantasy
trope, and that's a really worthwhile journey.
That's-- go to the underworld to seek a friend and
bring them back. That's as old as there's been
written word.
MARY: Yeah, that's Greek mythology--
MATT: That's old Gilgamesh days in Greek
mythology, yeah. So (pause) I forgot the
question.
(laughter)
MARY: Where do you want--
MATT: I think they have about a year of story left
before they finish the biggest arc of the story.
The next step, beyond the Chroma Conclave, because
that's-- Thordak the Cinder King, I expect him to
be probably around level 17 or 18 when they get to
that. Maybe earlier, depending on how brash they
are, how careful they are. But there's other
things brewing in the world of Exandria.
MARY: There's that spinning marble of death.
MATT: I don't know what that's about.
MARY: I don't know what that's about. What is that
about?
MATT: Put all the survivors on top of it, what
could possibly go wrong?
MARY: What could possibly go wrong? Just touch it,
get Grog, go on, grab it.
MATT: Don't tell them about the marble.
MARY: It's a good marble, it's good, you want it.
AMANDA: Hi--
MATT: Just a failed ritual.
AMANDA: Hi, I'm Amanda. I was wondering-- First of
all, thank you for the hours and hours that you
spend doing Critical Role and preparing episodes
for us to watch every Thursday. Thank you so much.
(cheering)
AMANDA: My question is: I'm trying to start my own
campaign at my school, but-- And it's really funny
because it's a liberal arts college so you'd think
that there would be a lot of people into it, but
they keep turning away, like, "Oh, that's not
cool." I was wondering you would have any tips as
to how to get people into D&D, because I'm trying
to-- I really want to do a game.
MATT: Have you ever seen that scene in A Clockwork
Orange with the--
(laughter)
MATT: That's the hard thing. You can't force
someone to want to play an RPG. You can always
find ways to show them that it's not what you
think it is. And if not Critical Role, there are
other shows out there as well that might fit them.
I think that's part of one of the reasons we did
this show, was we felt that there wasn't enough media
out there that represented friends having fun
playing a game that was entertaining to people. So
we hoped it would fill that gap for some. We had a
lot of people that have messaged us saying, "Well,
I showed the show to a few folks and they were
"like, 'Oh, this is it? That looks like fun.'"
That's a way you can do it, you can always pass
around episodes of our show or one of these other
great shows out there as an example to be like,
"No no no, it's just friends around a table
goofing off and improvising."
MARY: Also, ale.
(laughter)
MARY: Bring beer.
MATT: Aside from that, it's the way-- you've got
to explain it. Whenever anybody says, "What is
"Dungeons & Dragons?" Like when you asked me at the
beginning, "What is Dungeons & Dragons?"
MARY: What is it, yeah.
MATT: I'm like, uhh, it's communal storytelling
and improv.
MARY: Yeah.
MATT: In a fantasy setting. It's like Lord of the
Rings, but you're just making it up as you go.
MARY: That's how I describe it, I was like I'm
watching my friends make up Lord of the Rings. And
it's-- with dice, so there's math, which sucks.
But that's good, too. You need math, so it hits
so many different levels. It's kind of amazing.
MATT: What would you, as an outsider coming in
originally, what do you think would be the best
way to describe it to you, if that's not it?
MARY: That was it, to me. It's improv, I mean, it
was improv. It's come and play with your friends,
we're going to go into Rivendell. We're going to
create-- you want to be a wizard? You want to be
a-- what do you want to be? You can be anything
you want. You get to choose who you want to be and
we're going to play. And create things and see
what happens.
AMANDA: Thank you so much.
MATT: You're welcome. If that doesn't work, send
them to me.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hey, nice to see you guys. Mary,
I saw you yesterday. Hope to see you tomorrow, at
your autograph signings.
MATT: Come, do it.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: My question is: what has been the
most interesting thing that a player has done in
the game that was totally random, that you never
thought would happen?
MARY: Cows.
(laughter)
MATT: Yeah man, Seeming an entire party into cows,
to try and masquerade as-- and to a certain
extent, interrogate cows, as cows, varying sized
cows. Seeming messes everything up, I'm going to
keep putting this out there. I love it. I love it.
Then having to chase down a roc, so cast Fly on
the cows so you have a party of different-sized
flying cows across the moonlight. It's everything
you hoped Amgen would have produced.
(laughter)
MATT: Oh my god, that was weird. I've had some
strange things happen. I've had some surprising
things happen. I think really-- I'm sorry, it's
not because you're in the room, Shawn, I have to
keep picking on you. Sorry. When you cut out
Jack's character's tongue was one of the most
unexpected player things to ever happen in a
game.
SHAWN: Well, to be fair, it was Jack.
MATT: I know I know, he had it coming.
MARY: So this was one of your regular players, and
you cut out his tongue?
SHAWN: Yeah. You don't know me that well, Mary.
(laughing)
MARY: No no. I don't. How did he adapt to this new
occurrence?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Well, how well did the young
Greyjoy adapt?
MATT: Not very well. For him, his bard character
was a Vistani and was this very somewhat slimy,
charismatic in that I-can't-possibly-trust-you
ringmaster-y kind of way. Eventually he just got
fed up with it, and the corruption had set in so
strongly, he just cut his tongue out. Jack played
it as this now freaked-out, and then subservient,
quiet and--
MARY: Theon.
MATT: Yes, he would express his stuff through
character action, and describing what he was doing
emotionally, but couldn't actually say it. So it
would be like: "I bow my head and nod, and look
"directly in his eyes and give him a look of
intense hatred, but then look away and walk." And
I'm like: "All right!"
(laughter)
MATT: This got real.
MARY: That's the other thing I love about it, is
that you have to say yes. If you get out there and
you roll a 20 or whatever against someone else,
and they're like: "Don't do that to me!" it's
like: "I rolled a 20." You have to say yes, or you
have to leave. It's great, it teaches you you have
to deal with the shit you put out in the world and
everything, it's-- Consequences.
MATT: Yeah. In a lot of games if one player had
cut out another player's tongue, that would have
been a really tense, angry-- Real people being
angry like: "He can't do that, that's bullcrap!"
You know, maybe. Or you could take it as a really
interesting character moment, the way Jack did,
and play it into the personality, and now that's a
reason for the mute character to be silently
plotting against the person who did it, or try to
find a way to get their tongue back, and their
comeuppance against that player. That in itself
can be a really cool arc as well. I don't promote
PvP in your games unless your players are really
into the idea and respectful of continuing the
narrative, because that can go really south very
quickly if you're not being mature about it. But
yeah, that's one of the weirder ones.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So thank you, and just saying
y'all's show did inspire me to go down to the
gaming room downstairs and play my first game of
Dungeons and Dragons ever.
MATT: Awesome!
MARY: Yay! What did you roll?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I decided to go with a half-orc
barbarian named Thok that I like to do the voice for.
MATT and MARY: Yeah!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you guys.
(cheering)
MATT: That's awesome. Hello!
AUDIENCE MATT: Hi, my name's Matt.
MATT: Good strong name.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MATT: It is a good strong name, yes.
We've had this conversation before, in fact. So
I've been playing mostly Pathfinder, but a couple
of different RPGs for a little while now, I don't
get to play as often as I'd like. I've been very
blessed to have some very good DMs.
MATT: Awesome
AUDIENCE MATT: We just had a bit of a perfect
segue about how 20s can make things happen. I want
to ask, there's those instances where a series of
20s and ones tend to make something go hilariously
but horribly wrong. Do you have any experiences
like that? For example, we turned Fallout into
Risk. It was a lot of ones and 20s.
MATT: Okay. That's what I like about ones and 20s.
While in the system, technically in D&D, rolling a
20 on a skill check is isn't considered a critical
success necessarily, I consider that just lowering
the DC on the skill check, because I think a 20
should be magical whenever it's rolled. I think
that number is so intrinsically wonderful when you
see it on the table, that to roll that for a skill
check and have it not really be just a high
number, I think that robs you of that moment. So I
do give some sort of benefit. Like if Grog rolled
a 20 on an intelligence check a few times. That
doesn't mean he suddenly has an encyclopedia in
his head, or that he knows exactly what he's
trying to find out, but I'll give him a little bit
of information he otherwise might not have known.
Whether it be just an instinct or something he
remembered, he's like: "Oh yeah." You can find
ways to work it into a game. But there have been a
number of encounters that have been steamrolled by
a series of 20s. You guys watched Percy's crazy
20-a-thon butt flap orc death 2015.
MARY: Yeah.
MATT: That's going to be a bumper sticker, by the
way, that whole phrase.
(laughter)
MATT: There have been a series of social
encounters in games previously where a well-placed
20 or series of 20s have lead into a complete
social upheaval in a city. Like overthrowing an
individual who is in control of a market or a
political movement. We've had circumstances where
a natural one ended up accidentally inciting the
entire town to turn on a party. We've had a series
of unintentional 20s when you're trying to hold
back, end up in the death of what's supposed to be
just a threatened individual. It's led to a lot of
very sticky situations, but conversely it's led to
a lot of really great narrative moments. Nothing
really stands out in my head, because we've had
quite a few of them.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Scanlan Shorthalt?
MATT: Scanlan and Kaylie, that was one of those
natural ones-- When Scanlan's history caught up to
him, and she was there to kill him, or at least
cut him down to the point where he would
understand the pain that she went through. Through
his speech, and she rolled a straight one-- Those
are those perfect narrative moments. They don't
work out often, but every now and then you get
that moment where it would be perfect if I had
critically succeeded or critically failed at this
moment, and then it happens. That's the magic of
the game for me. Those are the moments you
remember forever.
AUDIENCE MATT: We basically killed an essential
NPC.
MATT: Yeah. Good job, guys! That's a whole
questline you'll never touch again. Thank you. Hello!
NATHAN: Hi there. I'm Nathan.
MATT and MARY: Hi Nathan!
NATHAN: I have no idea who you two are, I've
honestly never heard Critical Hit before, and this
seems like a series I need to invest in.
MARY: Have you ever played D&D?
NATHAN: I'll jump right to that. About two years
ago I just had a couple of friends invite me to play
D&D just-- After so many years of avoiding it for
the social stigma that you referenced, decided to
finally give it a shot, and the people who I was
with were amazing. Just playing with them, getting
to know them, and getting to know their player--
it really is a whole separate meta when you play
it. But! Our DM was horrendous. Comically so.
MARY: Like Showgirls bad, or?
(laughter)
MARY: I love Showgirls.
NATHAN: He had the strange tendency of
wanting to constantly put us in danger, but never
kill a character. Which was a very strange kind of
presentation. It really speaks to the enjoyment of
the game and the players, when we played for twice
a week for six months hating the game, and just
enjoying hating it. After two years of playing--
Getting new players and whatnot, I'm finally going
to try my hand at playing-- I didn't have your
magical quip, and I'm just going to start my own
after two years-- Had a lot of good experiences.
But what I wanted to ask you is, as a starting DM
I know there's going to be so much I'm going to
learn, and clearly got tips and tricks videos I'm
going to take a look at, but what I want to know
is: What major pitfall should I avoid? How should
I avoid being that first DM that's absolutely
terrible-- That Showgirls DM for my very first party?
MATT: My biggest recommendation is: Start small.
If you're doing homebrew, if you're making your
own world: Start small. If you're running a
pre-made adventure or module it can be a little
easier, especially for your first time because a
lot of the information is already provided for
you. But if you're creating your own story: Start
small. You get stuck in this world-building aspect
of trying to build a whole continent, a whole
culture-- multicultures and political structure
between these two sides and all of a sudden your
party is like: "We're going to spend the next six
"months in this city." You're like: "But I built
all this... Okay." So start on that city. Build a
small town or a small farm village or wherever you
want them to start, and just focus on fleshing out
that small area. Consider the major NPCs, who they
interact with positively or negatively. What's the
antagonistic force in that area that's going to be
driving the story? What type of character intrigue
can you input in this small little cluster of
people, and then once they start playing it, their
decisions will begin to inform your worldbuilding.
How they interact with these people, what kind of
things that their characters are interested in
finding in the story, will inform you of what kind
of things you can put into the world down the
road that will really hook them and get them
interested in the story as they progress. So start
small, have some big ideas and take notes on
things you would like to build in the long run,
but don't overwork yourself creating everything at
once, and have only this much be seen for a year.
That's my biggest recommendation, because all of
that effort you put into a smaller area will
make that small area so much more fleshed out and
lively and real in their minds, and really give
you, the DM, the confidence of knowing that
whatever they do in this little area, you have a
really strong idea of where it might go and how
you can react to their decisions. That's my
biggest recommendation.
NATHAN: Thank you.
MATT: No worries.
MARY: We have about five minutes left, so let's
see if we can go really fast and we can get all of
you guys done.
BLAKE: Hey, my name is Blake.
MARY: Hey Blake.
BLAKE: The question I had is: What was the saddest
moment you've had DMing, other than Pike's death?
One of those moments where it happened, and you
had to do it, but you felt bad doing it. Other
than killing a player.
MATT: Other than killing a player? Killing my city
of Emon. Man, building a town over two and a half,
three years and having it be like a central
location to the story and the characters' world,
and where they live and everyone they love lives,
for the most part, and it's the political center.
And then having to, because it was the narrative I
built, where the world was going and where the
story needed to be, come in and just smash it.
Just kick all my Legos over.
MARY: But it was such a cool way to do it.
MATT: Oh, it was fun.
MARY: Oh, such a cool way.
MATT: Weirdly cathartic.
BLAKE: Thank you.
MATT: You're welcome. In a stomp my own sandcastle
kind of way.
MARY: Yeah! Rawr, you played Godzilla in your own
Tokyo.
MATT: Basically. Hello!
SEAN: Hi, my name is Sean.
MATT: Hey Sean.
SEAN: So there has been a fad going around, I'm
not sure if you've heard of it, called out of
context D&D quotes.
(laughter)
MARY: Oh.
SEAN: So this is lines from different campaigns,
that, when taken completely out of their original
settings, sound hysterical. An example of a
campaign that I started thanks to you guys: "No,
"your familiar cannot hold a spear. It is made of
spaghetti."
(laughter)
SEAN: Are there any lines like that, or
moments of the show, either Critical Role, or any
other campaign you've had, that for people who may
not have seen the show may really enjoy.
MATT: Sure. I'm not going to be able to quote
things exactly from memory, but something along
the lines of: "Okay, I'm going to focus on the
poop in a jar. What can I see around me?" That's one.
(laughter)
MATT: Critical Role, ladies and gentlemen.
MARY: Woohoo!
STEFAN: Hi. My name is Stefan. Do you play Final
Fantasy?
(laughter)
STEFAN: I'm sorry.
(cheering)
MATT: Yes.
STEFAN: Yes, I have a question about the new game
that's coming out, Final Fantasy XV. Would that
one have online-- Like open roam like Final
Fantasy XIV?
MATT: I don't know. As far as I know from the
game, I don't think it's multiplayer, but I think
they're making it a little more open world, like
you can wander around the map. It's not like Final
Fantasy X where you had an airship and you pick
places and it drops you down there. I think it's a
little more open world wandering, from what I've
seen in the trailers. But it's not multiplayer
like XIV is, if that's what your question means.
STEFAN: Oh. Okay. Yeah, that was my question.
MATT: As far as I know. But when I find out I'll
let you know. I promise.
STEFAN: All right, thank you.
MATT: Thanks, buddy.
MARY: Okay quick, we only have a minute left.
MATT: We can do this, we can do this.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Fist of all, I just wanted to
thank you guys for sharing what is normally such
an intimate experience with everyone. On behalf of
everyone here and thousands of people on the internet.
MARY: That's because of you, Matt.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I'm actually here with my
players, everyone in my current campaign is here today.
MATT: Awesome!
AUDIENCE MEMBER: I'm starting to run another one
for some people who felt left out, and then my
current players wanted to play, and all of a
sudden I've got nine people and two beasts hanging
out that I'm going to have to run combat for.
MATT: I feel your pain.
(laughter)
AUDIENCE MEMBER: So I actually thought you would
be a terrific person to ask if I could get up
here: What are some of the ways that you raise the
bar, not just in combat, to make things
challenging for that amount of people?
MATT: A general sliding scale I go for, because--
Adding just more hit points means it can go on for
a long time. For scaling. So, I mean, adding more
hit points does help to have enemies have
longevity, especially when you have that many
players, because that's a lot of damage that can
be dished out in a combat round. My recommendation
is to also increase the damage that can be done by
these creatures. Because you'll get fewer rounds
of combat with more players, but to still keep it
dangerous, have the damage they take from certain
attacks be large enough to the point where it
really is dangerous. Or conversely, consider
adding abilities to certain creatures that are
area of effect attacks. You can customize any
monster they come across. The Monster Manual are
just templates, and suggestions of how to run
these things. You can customize however you want.
So if you want that beholder to be really nasty
against nine players, perhaps it has an eye wipe
ability that chooses to do one eye ray attack on
everything within a 20 foot radius. How will that
do against nine players?
AUDIENCE MEMBER: You're evil.
MATT: I'm just saying. There are ways you can
customize creatures to be more of a threat to
multiple entities. And, yeah, because a lot of
single target attacks will be less effective
against larger groups, think of ways that you can
give them big sweeping attacks that can hit
multiple guys at once. Or things that can lock
down and grapple multiple players at a distance
and make them ineffective for a round or two.
Like, those are ways you can still make it
threatening for that many players without having
to just give them 400 more hit points, and it
becomes a huge slog fest.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Thank you.
MARY: We are out of time. One more! One more.
MATT: One more; one more!
MEGAN: Okay. Hi, guys.
MARY and MATT: Hi, Megan!
MEGAN: Hi!
MARY: How are you?
MEGAN: I'm good. I know. I'm trying to be quick
best I can. What is the biggest inspiring and
influentional of Keyleth.
MARY: Of Keyleth?
MEGAN: And Zahra.
MARY: Oh, what was...?
MATT: Most influential for your character?
MARY: What was most influential for me? Wow.
MATT: While you think about that... For Keyleth, I
know Marisha, for her it was partially Avatar:
the Last Airbender. She's a huge fan of the
series. So when she created a druid, she wanted to
go that elemental, trying to learn, to master
different tribes of elemental types. Which has
been kind of a cool journey for her character.
Also, because Marisha, as you may have noticed,
she's a tough chick. She's, like, really
confident, and that's why I like her. You know.
She's the fighter; I'm the diplomat. It works out
fine. She defends my honor.
(laughter)
MATT: So for her, she wanted to choose a character
that was very against type for her. She wanted to
play a character that was very different than what
she would normally play, or who she is. So for
Keyleth, she wanted to make someone that was, you
know, very awkward and insecure and trying to find
her place in the world. And like with any D&D
character, you learn a lot about yourself as you
play a character. It's hard to not be made a
better person through these experiences. And so
she attributes-- While that was her inspiration
for Keyleth, Keyleth has also been an inspiration
to her. And she's learned to be more in touch with
that aspect of herself as well. So that's been
really inspirational for her.
MARY: Yeah.
MEGAN: I'm much like Keyleth. I'm very awkward and
have a lot of self-esteem issues as well.
MATT: Hey, we all are in many ways. I think we can
all agree on that.
MARY: It's probably why we all get along so well.
For Zahra, I looked at all the different classes
and-- because, again, I was brand new to this
world-- and I really looked at the group dynamic,
and I thought, What's missing? What's not there?
So I saw, okay, warlock, and then I was doing
research online. (mumbles) "I don't know if I
should do that or not." And somebody posted
something about, you know, badass tiefling
warlock, and I said, "Okay. Well, there's no
"tieflings there. So let's try that." And I found
out as I went. Again, as I said before, I sort of
started with myself in terms of the personality,
and the moon and everything else, and someone who
was-- I don't know. I think she's kinder and more
eloquent than I am, you know? So that helps me,
you know? Because I can be sort of, I'm from
Jersey; I get a little brash every now and then.
So I think she's a more elegant creature than I
am, which is nice. You know. That will still use
the Finger of Death on Keyleth within five minutes
of a knock-down-drag-out. She mentioned that the
other night. I was like, "Oh, sorry, Marisha."
But, yeah, we're not here to play tiddlywinks.
We're here to destroy.
MATT: Thank you.
MEGAN: All right, then. Thank you so much, guys.
Thank you.
MARY: Thanks, Megan. Thanks, you guys. I'm so
sorry.
MATT: So sorry. If we didn't get to your question,
if you see us around the convention, feel free to
stop us and ask. Or come to another panel, or come
to our signing and ask us. Or shoot me a message
on Twitter.
MARY: I'm going to a signing right now, so if you
want to come down I've got some great Kit Buss
artwork of the kill shot on Rimefang. So come and
check it out. It's really fun.
MATT: Thank you guys so much.
MARY: Bye, guys! Thank you! Roll 20s.
[elevator music]
[soft music]